I was a child in the 1960s. It was a time
of great technological progress and great
excitement about technologies. Perhaps the
biggest example at that time was man's space
travel. It was the time when the first astronauts
would go into space. When I grew up, it was
clear that I wanted to be an astronaut.
The other image of technological progress
was robots and at this time, there were mostly
robots in fiction. On television, when I was
a child growing up, there were many of these.
However, there were many earlier depictions
of robots in fiction, perhaps the first one
is the character Maria from the 1927 movie
Metropolis. The robot Gort from the 1951,
the original make of the movie “The Day
the Earth Stood Still”. Then perhaps, my
all time favourite robot Robby from the movie
Forbidden Planet in 1956 and he appeared in
a number of other follow-up movies. Without
doubt, the two most famous fictional robots
are these two from the original Star Wars
movie, which debuted in 1977, R2D2 and his
talkative friend C3PO.
These two characters depict robots as being
benign. That is helpful to the people around
them and also as being incredibly intelligent,
able to hold conversations in human languages
and being able to perform complex engineering
tasks like hacking a Death star.
This more recent movie Robot and Frank depicts
a very plausible future where an old person
is being assisted in their daily life by a
helper robot and this is a robot that is humanoid
in form, able to converse with the main character
Frank in natural language, guide him to eat
better and to change some of his bad habits.
However, all robots that we see in fiction
are just that. They are fiction. So, the robot
from the Metropolis movie way back in 1927
was indeed a human being inside a metallic
suit.
You think, well that is probably not surprising
that technology back in 1927 was really pretty
primitive but it hasn't actually changed much.
In the 1950s, Robby the robot was also a human
being inside a large metallic suit.
So, it goes even in the original Star Wars
movies C3PO was the actor Anthony Daniels
inside a gold metallic suit. So, it also was
for R2D2 the actor Kenny Baker inside R2D2.
Since the beginning of the Star Wars movie
franchise very many, many other movies have
come out and introduced us to particular robot
characters and some of their names are depicted
here as a function of time.
In fact, you might be surprise how many robots
you think you know or recognize. I love this
particular cartoon, by Richard Sergeant which
shows a wide range of fictional robots and
it is an interesting exercise to go through
this and see how many robots you can recognize
in this scene. The solutions are available
on the web.
In addition to all the portrayals of robots
in television and movies, there have also
been a large number of books, Science fiction
books which are based on the theme of robots
and interactions between robots and humanity,
both good interactions and bad interactions.
The word robot itself is a Czech word and
it means something like worker or slave and
it was coined in a 1920 play by the Czech
playwright, Karel Capek. His play was titled
Rossum's Universal Robot or RUR. The theme
of the play is that people create robots to
relieve them of the drudgery of everyday physical
work. The robots eventually get to resent
their role in society as being the ones who
do all the work. They rise up, they rebel
and they kill the human beings. So, this is
a very recurrent theme in many many robot
movies being made to this very day. We can
think of it perhaps as a reinterpretation
of the story of Frankenstein from at least
a hundred years before this.
I had the opportunity to be in Prague a few
years ago and I went and paid my respects
to Karel Capek, I went and visited his grave
and a photograph is shown here and I was delighted
to see it that somebody has left a small model
robot on his headstone. I wish I had thought
of doing that myself.
Perhaps the author who has done the most to
popularize the idea of robots in fiction is
Isaac Asimov, a very, very prolific American
writer of Science fiction. A key element of
almost all of Asimov's stories are his laws
of robotics. In robots in his stories, these
laws were imbedded in the positronic brain
of every robot. The robots were incapable
of violating any of these laws. If you look,
these laws at face value, they all make a
lot of sense, though in most of Asimov's stories,
there was always some wrinkle or corner case
in the implementation of the laws, the way
the laws interacted with human beings or with
other robots.